---
layout: post
title:  "A brief historical narrative of establishment of Patriarchy"
date:   2018-03-8 11:00:30 +0530
#categories: jekyll update
---


In the Rig Vedic society, a continuous struggle between Aryans and indigenous tribes was observed. Aryans were essentially Indo European immigrants, who treated the local tribes with particular hostility, in view of their racial inferiority. So we can claim that a seed of racial discrimination was sowed which would grow into the branches of highly stratified society with elements of casteism and class discrimination, in the evolving daughter society. Most of the men of conquered tribes were either killed, or fled, and the conquerors (Aryans) enslaved these women of conquered tribes. This phenomena can be corroborated with Lerner’s argument, who claimed that conquering tribes killed the defeated men, and enslaved their women in prehistoric times.

This process was a major stepping stone in the solidification of patriarchy in the contemporary prehistoric cultures. However, Indic society flourished with its idiosyncratic feature of caste based social stratification. Now we can try to observe how these processes of caste based stratification and women enslavement fused together. Literary evidence from RIg Veda portrayed Aryan women ruling over the slaves and cattles, while dasis were exploited for their labor and sexual services by men of conquering clans. In fact many myths of Rig Veda reflect an explicit relationship of women with sexuality, for example apsaras were free from men control, while demoniac women were considered a threat to men and their rituals.

In the post-Vedic era, since the dependence on agriculture increased, role of Aryan women was marginalised, reducing them to household in production value, while dasis provided labour for field work. Literary texts like The Satapatha Brahmana suggest that women were rendered powerless by  appropriating all the source of their strength. Kingship/state became associated with the control and subjugation of women. So we can see a clear dichotomic discourse of the two class of women in the Indic society, which was not evident in Lerner’s analysis. 



When economy shifted to agricultural phase (800 BC to 600 BC), caste and class divisions came into the scene, and patrilineal succession was fairly well established. Private control over land was also established. Hence at this point, female sexuality had to be ‘managed’ to ensure caste purity, where ‘caste’ was an additional constraint over the female sexuality. Gerda Lerner points out to process of “Exchange of Women”, as  identified by Claude Levi-Strauss, as having a pivotal role in the processof fe­male subordination. Lerner pointed out that the process of exchange of women emerged as a result of control over women’s sexuality, which led to objectification of women. But, in addition to Lerner’s hypothesis, in Indic society, internal control over female sexuality was practiced (internal here refers to within the caste).    Women were represented as sinful and lustful creatures, who could never be trusted, and must be watched upon. This had a close link with upper class women (wives of kings and brahmanas), who had to face a greater restrain. 

Since women subordination was essential to establish control over women sexuality, ideology of Pativratadharma was used as a mask to reproduce the hierarchical social structure with the complicity of women, whereas Lerner instilled the concept of Paternalistic Dominance as a tool to ensure women complicity in the establishment of patriarchal principles. The complete ideology of Pativratadharma was moulded in way which made women keep a check on their behaviour and sexuality without the intervention of state. As a second level of sexuality check, brahmanical society institutionalised coercive control, where it was socially acceptable for the husband to resort to physical violence in case of breach of chastity of his wife. Further along, involvement of state made the whole idea perpetuate much more deeply in the roots of brahmanic/indic society. 

Intra gender stratification of power based on caste was established while simultaneously a greater and selective restrain was practiced over upper class Aryan women. So we can see, unlike Lerner’s framework, the intersectional brahmanical patriarchy made their women invest in a structure which rewarded and subordinated them at the same time. To be precise, women formed the pivot for entire Hindu structure, since women - not men, were the points of entry into the caste system.

