---
layout: post
title:  "Inheritance relations with domestic labour"
date:   2018-02-11 11:00:30 +0530
#categories: jekyll update
---
	 	 	
                              
Inheritance is widely referred to as a tool for capital accumulation, which allows for capital transfer without entering the market sphere. It allows property to change hands directly through familial amalgamations, but gist of the problem lies here – within the same family, receivers and non receivers of the inherited property reside together. Therefore, creation of hierarchy is inevitable. In this essay, I will try to analyse Sangari’s ideas relating domestic labour – invisible with respect to production, to the process of inheritance.

Further along, capitalism has transformed family into a unit where values are personalised and transformed, so that both inherited property and domestic labour by the woman are taken temporarily out of the market sphere and then is returned to it at some other stage as capital (inherited property) and paid services, and the cycle continues – from which we can see that relationship of domestic labour’s devaluation to inheritance is largely intertwined.

Due to the component of patrilocality in the institution of marriage, women face practical challenges in the process of managing, let alone claiming capital assets (primarily land) from their natal family – which is patrilineal without any exception. In this process, what gets attached to women is partial transfer of natal family’s property to the marital family. This partial transfer, known as dowry, lies beneath the massive further invisibilisation of women’s labour – overcommiting them to the marital family. This whole process devaluates the domestic labour and makes it “necessary for their own survival and for legitimating their dependent existence” – to quote Sangari.

Therefore it can be claimed that inheritance rights of women carries an inverse relation to the labour – the locus classicus being the upper caste widow, who lies at the boundaries of our social beliefs and taboos. Marital family has not been sure of ways to deal with the upper caste widow – as a result, she was open to hard labour, dispossession, sexual availability, with zero inheritance rights. Sangari mentions about how ‘Hindu Widows Right of Inheritance Bill’ proposed in 1992, faced an umpteen number of argument all of which bear a clear relationship to women’s relationship to inheritance in our society.

In fact inheritance rights are used as a pivot of control, wherever possible. Only visible form of inheritance which women possess in my observation is the mother’s jewellery – that too out of affection, not as a right, for that matter. In addition to that, all sources I came across claim that daughter in-laws have no legal entitlement to inherit.

In her article, Sangari talks about a plethora of land reform laws, aiming at restriction of free movement of the land, however, all of the reform laws have failed to improve women’s control over resources, only the fact that they now get equal wages, not to mention that too for double labour. If we try to analyse the reason for these observations, it can be observed that a family is still considered a basic economic unit in an economy, along with the fact that divorce and remarriage of women are still problematic, makes their property rights difficult to implement. Here, we should also consider that land reform laws – which aim at curbing free distribution of land, in turn , made dowry a base for fluidity of land in the market economy.

Hence, involvement of dowry as a form of inheritance in functioning of household as a productive unit accounts for the observation that male consumption rights are being strengthened, simultaneously along with female deindividuation and labour invisibilisation inside the household.










