---
layout: post
title:  "Turup"
date:   2018-01-22 11:00:30 +0530
#categories: jekyll update
---

Recently, I came across an interesting film which messes with a lot of social issues at once.

‘Turup’, i think is a feminist film because it masterfully portrays the intersection of gender with other structures of oppression. Before I begin the analysis, let me summarise the plot in a couple of lines. Neelima is shown to be in a classical private capitalist marital relationship, whose sexuality is controlled by Varun in lieu of proper family planning. Lata’s residence is not her marital but filial home, where her younger brother believes her to be his responsibility and tries to gain control over her sexuality by searching for someone to marry her. Monica emerges as a rather unconventional character because she is presented as the most ‘independent’ amongst these women. Her concept of family and marriage is in contrast to Neelima.

When we talk about intersectionality, we primarily try to analyse how the two social structures mutually transform each other and thus impart differential effects on different section of people. In this film, it is visible that control over sexuality intersects with capitalism, caste, class and religion, which inherently transforms its nature. In the case of Neelima and Varun, we observe that a material argument is brought into the picture when Neelima tries to question Varun about his decisions, whereas in the case of Lata, this control over sexuality takes a purely ideological form, and Deepak tries to justify his actions because he is the prospective patriarch of the family. This conviction in Deepak takes an even deeper form because he belongs to a lower-class, lower-caste economically poor family who does not live in a closed structure like Neelima’s family. Lata’s family is relatively open to influence and Deepak believes that her affair with Majid is bringing defamation to the family. From here on, one more social structure by the name of ‘religion’ brought into the intersection and as a result  ‘control of sexuality’ takes a more stringent and severe form. This intersection with religion is also used as a political agenda, when Tiwariji decides to use the case of lower class girl as abduction by a Muslim man. In ‘Turup’, particular people are shown to be intolerant towards the people of other caste, and are fervent to prevent their ‘sisters and daughters’ from these people. In the case of Lata and Majid, the gender intersects with caste-class and religion, and consequently both face different forms of oppression.

When we further try to analyse the intersection of capitalism with control over sexuality, the prime example from ‘Turup’ comes out to be the organisation of female sterilisation camp, where the lady herself encourages the volunteers to get women to sterilisation camp on the pretext of ‘bonus’.  

In the movie, Monica is portrayed as a character different from the rest of women we have talked about. Her concept of family lies in strong correspondence to the idea of commons. No one is directly shown to exhibit control over her sexuality, since she willingly decided not to marry. However, Monica is shown to be a victim of capitalist exploitation when tells Neelima that she was fired from a factory once she joined the union. Control over her ‘reproductive power’ comes about as a result of class difference, as Monica is shown to be performing her duty while being sheerly ignored by her employers. In the film, Neelima used to address Monica by her name and ‘tum’, in spite of the age difference between the two, however when Monica gets Neelima a story that she could publish, she starts to address her as ‘didi’ and ‘aap’, which shows how the social intersectional dynamics change at a personal level all the time. In the ending scene of ‘Turup’, Monica is shown to be playing chess with her family member, which could be symbolically interpreted as women’s emancipation. 
